---
tags:
  - education
  - experience
  - philosophy
  - culture
  - politics
  - market
  - products
  - services
  - transformation
  - design
  - HigherEducation
  - grounding-theory
aliases:
  - 4. Education as experience
---
The concept of experience has been appropriated by various thinkers and researchers who see in it the potential to unveil this dimension of action that occurs to us. At times, this concept is theorised in a highly philosophical, broad, and abstract manner, reflecting its political and cultural dimension in education; other times, experience is seen more pragmatically in its applications of marketing nature, actualised in products and services. However, there is a common point that unites both the more strict conceptions and the more holistic perspectives of “experience” as a concept: it holds the potential for transformation.

In this subchapter, we address the concept of experience in some of its applications in Design and then contrast it with its meaning in the field of education in the sections “[[4.1 The concept of experience in Design|4.1 The concept of experience in Design]]” and “[[4.2 The concept of experience in education|4.2 The concept of experience in education]],” respectively. The last section of this subchapter, titled “[[4.3 Experiencing higher education|4.3 Experiencing higher education]],” provides some relevant data to contextualize the student and teacher experiences in Brazilian higher education.

---
# 4. A educação como experiência
O conceito de experiência tem sido apropriado por diversos pensadores e pesquisadores, que enxergam nele o potencial de desvendar essa dimensão de ação que nos ocorre. Por vezes, esse conceito é teorizado de forma bastante filosófica, ampla e abstrata, refletindo sua dimensão política e cultural na educação; outras vezes, a experiência é vista de forma mais pragmática em suas aplicações de teor mercadológico, objetivadas em produtos e serviços. Entretanto, existe um ponto comum que une tanto as concepções mais estritas quanto as perspectivas mais holísticas do conceito de “experiência”: nela reside o potencial da transformação.

Neste subcapítulo, tratamos do conceito de experiência em algumas das suas aplicações no Design e, em seguida, o contrapomos ao seu significado na área da educação nos itens “[[4.1 The concept of experience in Design]]” e “[[4.2 The concept of experience in education]]”, respectivamente. O último item deste subcapítulo, entitulado “[[4.3 Experiencing higher education]]”, traz alguns dados pertinentes para contextualizar a experiência discente e docente na educação superior brasileira.